## Supported Platforms

As this database is written in Java, it can run on many different platforms. It is tested with Java 7. All major operating systems (Mac OS, Ubuntu,...) are supported.

## Starting and Using the H2 Console
The H2 Console application lets you access a database using a browser.

This is a client/server application, so both a server and a client (a browser) are required to run it.

Depending on your platform and environment, there are multiple ways to start the H2 Console: 

OS | Start
------------ | -------------
Any | Open a console window, navigate to the directory h2/bin, and type: <br/> `java -jar h2*.jar`

### Connecting to the Server using a Browser
If the server started successfully, you can connect to it using a web browser. If you started the server on the same computer as the browser, open the URL `http://localhost:8082`. If you want to connect to the application from another computer, you need to provide the IP address of the server, for example: `http://192.168.0.2:8082`.

### Connecting to a Database using JDBC
To connect to a database, a Java application first needs to load the database driver, and then gets a connection. A simple way to do that using the following code:
```
import java.sql.*;
public class Test {
    public static void main(String[] a)
            throws Exception {
        Class.forName("org.h2.Driver");
        Connection conn = DriverManager.
            getConnection("jdbc:h2:~/test", "sa", "");
        // add application code here
        conn.close();
    }
}
```
This code first loads the driver (`Class.forName(...)`) and then opens a connection (using `DriverManager.getConnection()`). The driver name is `"org.h2.Driver"`. The database URL always needs to start with `jdbc:h2:` to be recognized by this database. The second parameter in the `getConnection()` call is the user name (`sa` for System Administrator in this example). The third parameter is the password.