# NBD
The Network Block Device is a Linux-originated lightweight block access
protocol that allows one to export a block device to a client. While the
name of the protocol specifically references the concept of block
devices, there is nothing inherent in the *protocol* which requires that
exports are, in fact, block devices; the protocol only concerns itself
with a range of bytes, and several operations of particular lengths at
particular offsets within that range of bytes.

For matters of clarity, in this document we will refer to an export from
a server as a block device, even though the actual backing on the server
need not be an actual block device; it may be a block device, a regular
file, or a more complex configuration involving several files. That is
an implementation detail of the server.

## NBD Setup
### NBD Server
**Synopsis**
```
hermes:~# nbd-server port filename [ -r ] [ -c ] [ -C config file ]
```
**Options**
```
port   The port the server should listen to.

filename
       The filename of the file that should be exported. This can be any file, including "real" blockdevices (i.e. a file from /dev).

-r     Export the file read-only. If a client tries to write to a read-only exported file, it will receive an error, but the connection will stay up.

-c     Copy on write. When this option is provided, write-operations are not done to the exported file, but to a separate file.
       This separate file is removed when the connection is closed.

-C     Specify configuration file. The default configuration file, if this parameter is not specified, is /etc/nbd-server/config.
```
**Example**
```
hermes:~# mkdir /exports
hermes:~# dd if=/dev/zero of=/exports/nbd-export bs=1024 count=100000
hermes:~# mke2fs nbd-export
/exports/nbd-export is not a special block device.
Proceed anyway? (y,n) y
hermes:~# nbd-server 5000 /exports/nbd-export
```

### NBD Client
**Synopsis**
```
nbd-client host [ port ] nbd-device
```
**Options**
```
nbd-device
       The block special file this nbd-client should connect to.
```
**Example**
```
hermes:~# nbd-client server.domain.com 5000 /dev/nbd0
hermes:~# mount /dev/nbd0 /mnt
hermes:~# ls /mnt
lost+found
hermes:~# df
Filesystem     1K-blocks     Used Available Use% Mounted on
[...]
/dev/nbd0          96828       13     91815   1% /mnt
hermes:~# dd if=/dev/zero of=/mnt/text count=8192 bs=1024
```

## NBD Protocol

### Protocol phases

The NBD protocol has two phases: the handshake and the transmission. During the
handshake, a connection is established and an exported NBD device along other
protocol parameters are negotiated between the client and the server. After a
successful handshake, the client and the server proceed to the transmission
phase in which the export is read from and written to.

#### Handshake

The handshake is the first phase of the protocol. Its main purpose is to
provide means for both the client and the server to negotiate which
export they are going to use and how.

#### Transmission

There are two message types in the transmission phase: the request,
and the reply.  The
transmission phase consists of a series of transactions, where the
client submits requests and the server sends corresponding replies.
The phase continues until
either side terminates transmission; this can be performed cleanly
only by the client.

Replies need not be sent in the same order as requests (i.e., requests
may be handled by the server asynchronously).
Clients SHOULD use a handle that is distinct from all other currently
pending transactions, but MAY reuse handles that are no longer in
flight; handles need not be consecutive.  In each reply message
the server MUST use the same value for
handle as was sent by the client in the corresponding request.  In
this way, the client can correlate which request is receiving a
response.

##### Ordering of messages and writes

The server MAY process commands out of order, and MAY reply out of
order, except that:

* All write commands (that includes `NBD_CMD_WRITE`,
  and `NBD_CMD_WRITE_ZEROES`) that the server
  completes (i.e. replies to) prior to processing a
  `NBD_CMD_FLUSH` MUST be written to non-volatile
  storage prior to replying to that `NBD_CMD_FLUSH`. This
  paragraph only applies if `NBD_FLAG_SEND_FLUSH` is set within
  the transmission flags, as otherwise `NBD_CMD_FLUSH` will never
  be sent by the client to the server.

* A server MUST NOT reply to a command that has `NBD_CMD_FLAG_FUA` set
  in its command flags until the data (if any) written by that command
  is persisted to non-volatile storage. This only applies if
  `NBD_FLAG_SEND_FUA` is set within the transmission flags, as otherwise
  `NBD_CMD_FLAG_FUA` will not be set on any commands sent to the server
  by the client.

`NBD_CMD_FLUSH` is modelled on the Linux kernel empty bio with
`REQ_PREFLUSH` set. `NBD_CMD_FLAG_FUA` is modelled on the Linux
kernel bio with `REQ_FUA` set.

> Many storage devices, especially in the consumer market, come with volatile
write back caches.  That means the devices signal I/O completion to the
operating system before data actually has hit the non-volatile storage.  This
behavior obviously speeds up various workloads, but it means the operating
system needs to force data out to the non-volatile storage when it performs
a data integrity operation like fsync, sync or an unmount.<br><br>
The Linux block layer provides two simple mechanisms that let filesystems
control the caching behavior of the storage device.  These mechanisms are
a forced cache flush, and the Force Unit Access (FUA) flag for requests.<br><br>
The REQ_PREFLUSH flag can be OR ed into the r/w flags of a bio submitted from
the filesystem and will make sure the volatile cache of the storage device
has been flushed before the actual I/O operation is started.  This explicitly
guarantees that previously completed write requests are on non-volatile
storage before the flagged bio starts.<br><br>
The REQ_FUA flag can be OR ed into the r/w flags of a bio submitted from the
filesystem and will make sure that I/O completion for this request is only
signaled after the data has been committed to non-volatile storage.

##### Request message

The request message, sent by the client, looks as follows:

C: 32 bits, 0x25609513, magic (`NBD_REQUEST_MAGIC`)  
C: 16 bits, command flags  
C: 16 bits, type  
C: 64 bits, handle  
C: 64 bits, offset (unsigned)  
C: 32 bits, length (unsigned)  
C: (*length* bytes of data if the request is of type `NBD_CMD_WRITE`)  

##### Reply message

The reply message MUST be sent by the server in response to all
requests (save for `NBD_CMD_DISC`). The message looks as
follows:

S: 32 bits, 0x67446698, magic (`NBD_REPLY_MAGIC`)  
S: 32 bits, error (MAY be zero)  
S: 64 bits, handle  
S: (*length* bytes of data if the request is of type `NBD_CMD_READ`)  
